You're going to have trouble with that. That's
something they can see. And they did.
But actually it turned out that the fishermen
learned that the area where they had been dumping
this acid was known as the acid ground and was a very
good area to fish in. So I haven't heard from that
for quite a long time. So you primarily raised
funds in from private sources here during the war
for biology, or after the war. Excuse me.
Primarily then you have private funds coming in
for your work right after the war. Very small,
relatively speaking. But that was all they had to
run the biology on, that and a little bit of the
institution. And that held on for... where it
really held on for the rest of my time, which ended
in 1956 when I retired. Now the National Science
Foundation has taken over and
gives very large grants for biology. That was not
true then, sir. What? That was not true then. What
sort of biology are you working on between 1945 and
1956? Well, it was this problem of pollution. We
worked for the National Lid Company, as I told you.
Then the next job was for a group that were building
a great trunk sewer down the Raritan Valley. The
Raritan Valley had become a great industrialized
area. It had grown very rapidly. And the little
local sewers were inadequate to take care of. And
so they conceived the idea of all getting together
and building a trunk sewer down to the head of
Raritan Bay and dumping it into the Raritan Bay.
And we were engaged to study Raritan Bay in that
connection. Then the oyster industry in Great
South Bay had difficulty. And they engaged us in
some of the local towns, Islip and and so engaged us
to study the pollution of Laritan Bay by duck
farms.
And what did you discover in that? Did it affect the
oysters? Oh, it absolutely ruined the oyster
industry. I don't believe there's an oyster
raised in Great South Bay anymore. The famous Blue
Point oyster. Yeah. Blue Point is in Laritan Bay.
But the viewpoint oysters now all come from either
Long Island Sound or New Jersey or somewhere else.
The oysters simply stopped feeding on this water
and soared to death and became nothing but so much
water.
What was Columbus Island like to work for? Oh,
he was very easy to work for.
What sort of man was he?
I think Roger has just written a memoir about him. I
remember he's consulting me, and I tell him.
Roger's insistence insists that Columbus and
Henry Bigelow were amateurs. I think it's a little
bit overdrawn there. I think I would shade him down
a bit.
But as you know, he was a man, I would say that he was
born into a wealthy family. I don't know how
wealthy or whether it was great wealth or moderate
wealth, but I don't think he ever worried very much
about how he earned his living. And he went to
Harvard. His family background was in banking.
And he assumed as a young man, or as a boy, that he was
going to become a banker. So he specialized in
mathematics. I don't think he ever did any really
mathematical work, except not original work, at
any rate. the calculations he had to make for his
Gulf Stream currents and so on were based on
mathematical ideas, but they weren't his ideas.
He was following well-laid-down prescriptions.
But he was also brought up on the water at the head of
Long Island Sound and was a very good sailor.
And
while he was in college,
he
got hold of a ship, a schooner,
and made a cruise to Labrador. And he thought,
well, possibly he could do some scientific work on
this cruise.
So he went to see Professor Bigelow, who was at
Harvard, who was the fish expert and the jellyfish
expert, essentially, but who had been doing this
work in the Gulf of Maine. And Bigelow helped him
get some apparatus and told him what to do. And then
he went back and became Bigelow's student. He
never took his doctor's degree at Harvard or
anywhere else.
He never thought his work was worth it. He didn't.
And
that sort of shows how naive one can be and how naive
students are about the doctor's thesis. Yes. You
probably have that problem in history also. We do
indeed have that problem in history, believe me.
Yes.
How was the institution changing in the 50s while
you were here? Was there an influx of new people?
Did it seem to change in a new direction?
Well, it has grown, of course, tremendously.
It has changed because
the board of directors, the board of trustees, are
no longer scientists. They are predominantly
successful administrators of business. And
they're a very fine lot of fellows, and very wise, I
think, probably. But there are practically no
scientists amongst them. Or if they have been
scientists, it's so remote. And there certainly
are no oceanographers amongst them. Now,
originally,
particularly during this period, immediately
after the war,
the trustees were people like Aethels and
Spielhaus, Brian Wilson, Detlef Planck.
Well, that's enough to illustrate that. Spike
Cole, and so on. All of which were scientists, most
of which had worked in Woods Hole. And those
trustees meetings used to be damn good fun,
because these fellows knew each other very well.
They fought amongst one another. You had
wonderful arguments about every question that
came up. Now the trustees meetings are so dull that
I decide I won't go to them, and I usually do go. But
we all sit in a big room, and we hear the director
read a report on the wonderful things the
institution is doing. Of course it's wonderful.
He wouldn't say it otherwise.
The growth in size, the amount of money which is
available, I'm simply shocked at the amount which
is spent by practically beginning people.
I have never gotten more than one grant to support
my work. When I retired, I applied for a grant for
$10,000 to study salt marshes. I suspect they were
an awful long time granting that money. I suspect
they couldn't quite decide where the soil marshes
fitted in. And
I spent, I suppose, 80% of that simply on having
chemical analyses made for carbon-14, which we
were not set up to make and which were quite
expensive. The rest were to hire boys to help me in
the summer to do the heavy helped me with the heavy
work.
They have more money than that now, certainly.
They get more money than that now, certainly. Oh,
$10,000.
That's nothing. I don't think they look at less
than $100,000 for one year of
work. I worked for 10 years on $10,000. You spent 10
years on the salt marshes before? Yeah.
What did you finally publish on the salt marshes?
What was your final paper on the salt marshes?
Well, my final paper was published in 1973, I
think, on the development. When I retired in 1956,
or 55 when I was 60 or 65 years old. I retired just as
early as I could. 55 to 65 was the retirement age.
They, in exceptional cases, might ask you to stay
on for an additional four years. But I didn't want
to do that. And so I retired just as quickly as I
could. The afternoon that I finally moved my last
piece of junk out of my office up here, I went over to
Barnstable and tried out a piece of apparatus,
which worked. I went over the next day and tested
another piece of apparatus, and it worked. And I
worked for 10 years studying the development of
this marsh.
Sounds like a wonderful retirement to me. Spend 10
years on your own work. It was a lot of fun. Then at
the end of 10 years, when I was 75 years or more, I
began to get awkward. And I fell overboard several
times. And I realized I'd better not go out on small
boats anymore. And then some time after that, my
eyes went out. I had cataracts. So I can't see very
well. So that's what the end of actual field work.
And so since that time, I have been working on the
tides of the New England coast, which are all
described in the tide tables and carefully
measured in thousands of places to see. but never
put together as a whole by anybody, so far as I know.
And I have been, well, I started out with the idea of
writing a book about the tides of the New England
coast, which is a very interesting area because it
contains illustrations of practically all the
tidal phenomena which are important in the world.
And you see, we have the largest tides in the world.
We have reversing falls, so-called, at St. John
and so on. And I thought a book of that sort would be a
good bit of interest and value to people who lived
or spent their summers along this coast. And there
are a lot of them. And then I found that I couldn't
write that book because I couldn't put into the
into a popular book, things which the experts
would not recognize and take for granted. And so I
had to write a paper for the experts, which I'm now
working on.
Whether I live long enough to write the book, I
don't know. But at the moment, chances are pretty
good that the experts at least will get their
story. Yeah. Woods Hole must have been a
delightful place in the 40s and 50s. Certainly a
lovely place. Well, it was a more delightful place
in the 15s and 20s. It was, huh? Did you ever foresee
it becoming the kind of institution it became
today? Did you ever foresee it becoming the kind of
institution it became today? No.
It was just sort of a place a person went to work and
enjoy. Yes. Oh, I knew that the MBL was a great
institution, perhaps the greatest marine
laboratory in the world at that time. And it would
continue to be such.
Of course, the oceanographic was an
afterthought. And I did not conceive of us
becoming, receiving the support to become the
large institution it now has.
What was the sort of reaction around Woods Hole the
first time the big boats came in after World War II?
when the Atlantis is created and so forth for you?
Well, I don't think that
Woods Hole was very much surprised by anything.
This place has been a seaport for a good many years.
You see, back in the 70s and 80s and 90s, there was
the Guiano Works here, and ships came from the
Pacific loaded with Guiano. and from other parts
of the world with other materials, so that they
were quite used to having the biggest ships that
existed at that time come into this harbor. And
then that fell through, and the laboratories
came. They operated smaller than steam ships,
steamboats, boats 40, 50, 50 feet long, you see.
with little steam engines in them. And then the
Atlantis was the biggest sailing vessel, which
was then built at that time. But that wasn't so
much, you know. They were quite used to seeing
large yachts go through and so on and stuff here.
And then the further additions came gradually,
year after year, ship after ship, bigger and
bigger.
I don't think there was any great shock involved of
that sort to the community.
To the institution, what was the sort of reaction
among the faculty when for the first time it was
discovered you'd go out to deep sea? When you
discovered you'd go out to deep sea with vessels,
what's up?
I don't quite put your question into its context. I
was thinking, what was the reaction of the older
members of the faculty when it becomes apparent
that with changes and innovation in
oceanography, that you're going to be able to do
deep sea research, just not sound and coastal? No,
in the first place, there was no faculty. Ah, OK.
I'm in staff. Yeah, those were the staff. And in the
second place, the Atlantis was built to do work in
the open sea. It used to regularly go to Bermuda. It
was built in Copenhagen. It came across to
somewhere south of Greenland and made a section
down the center of the Atlantic to, I guess, as far
as Bermuda, and then came in. And it used to go three
or four times a year to Bermuda. And every... it
would make a cruise through the Caribbean, so that
going into deep water was not a novelty to the set.
It was just a part of it all. Ah, good.
I would like to have seen Woods Hole in 1915, 16, or
17. I bet it was a gorgeous place. Still is a
gorgeous place. Well, of course, in those days it
was a very simple little town. I think the streets
were not paved. Certainly only the main street was
paved. The sidewalks were not paved. There were no
curves. Those came after or during the First World
War. And I can remember at the end of the war how
much, how dressed up the town looked. coming back
and finding the curves set in, sidewalks built.
They used to be just paths through the grass where
you walked along beside the dirt road.
See, that would be
nice.
When
you were at Harvard and came down here, was the
faculty at Harvard happy that you were going to
work in the lab?
Well, the faculty, as such, of course, was utterly
indifferent to me. No, there's been a long
tradition at Harvard. of working somewhere in the
summer. Professor Mark, who was quite an older
member of the faculty at the time when I was a
student, I suppose he was 60 years old when I was 17
or 18, you see. He started a little laboratory in
Mervilla and used to take
some of the graduate students down there every
summer. And then Dr. Parker, who was my professor,
with whom I did my doctor's work, came down to Woods
Hole pretty regularly and brought one or two
students down with him. So there had existed a
tradition of going to someplace to work during the
summer along the shore, either Bermuda or Woods
Hole. And then here it was chosen. It must have been
a marvelous relationship between Harvard and the
institutions around here to come down here and
work. Well,
I think the good relation is the fact that
dependents are often due on the fact that there was
no relation.
Harvard, you know, is somewhat sooty. Yes. You've
heard that. Yeah, I've heard that. Some people
have been amazed as
much. No, I remember, I
forget who told me this, but at all events, someone
representing the oceanographic talked to the
dean at Harvard. about
credit for work at Harvard down at Woods Hole,
which we were practically willing, of course, to
give. I mean, worked hard, and honestly, we were
willing to say so. It was explained to him that
Harvard gave credit to the students of Professor
Bigelow and Professor Redfield of Harvard, not to
the Woodsville Oceanographic Institution as
such. Do you see?
I think one of the reasons I'm not very sympathetic
with the modern development here, with the
formalization of education, for example, the
institution granting degrees and so on, I think
that we gave every opportunity that is given today
to the graduate student at Harvard or Tech or Brown
or where have you who wanted to come and work with
whoever was here.
It was all done on a personal basis, man to man, not
institution to institution. But then education
is man to man and not institution to institution.
Nobody is educated by Harvard or Texas A&M.
Those institutions draw rather broad lines
around what the man does. But he is really educated
by the staff which is picked by those institutions
as individuals.
Gee, that's true.
And you always preferred it that way? I personally
have preferred it that way. I've never greatly
consulted in the matter. Now, you're a trustee,
though, aren't you? I'm a trustee emeritus, or an
honorary trustee. I forget what they're called.
They're called different things in different
places. But essentially, all these
institutions, when you get to being a trustee,
they now put a retirement age, you see, on it. And so
they won't be managed by a lot of old fogies. And
then they just want to be kind to these old fellas.
And so as they kick them upstairs, they make them
honorary or emeritus trustees in special class.
They send them all the notices, all the print
managers, but they don't let them vote. They don't
talk. But they don't have to do anything about the
talking, because they don't let them vote.
I think you have guests who have arrived. Yeah,
that's my daughter who has driven up from New
Jersey. Oh, very good. I will take no more of your
time, but I have enjoyed meeting you. It's one of
those things I wanted to do. So I'm glad I called you
up and got a chance to come by. I enjoyed talking to
you. I hate it just to disturb you on the phone, but I
thought that was the easiest way. Oh, yes, well, it
was very convenient. I was with Al Vine when I
called over at the place and just called away.